Making the Website Feel Like an SPA
===================================

.. index::
    single: Symfony UX
    single: Turbo
    single: Stimulus

The website is fast, but every click still reloads a full HTML page. The traditional answer is to build a *Single-Page Application* (SPA): a JavaScript application, written in another stack, that talks to the API. That means a second application to develop, secure, deploy, and keep in sync with the main one.

Symfony has a different answer. *Symfony UX* is an initiative that brings the SPA experience to server-rendered applications: keep writing Twig templates and Symfony controllers, and sprinkle JavaScript only where it adds value.

Discovering Symfony UX
----------------------

The good news? We have been using Symfony UX since the very first step of this book. The webapp skeleton ships with two of its packages: ``symfony/stimulus-bundle`` and ``symfony/ux-turbo``. Have a look at ``importmap.php``:

.. code-block:: php
    :class: ignore

    return [
        'app' => ['path' => './assets/app.js', 'entrypoint' => true],
        '@hotwired/stimulus' => ['version' => '3.2.2'],
        '@symfony/stimulus-bundle' => ['path' => './vendor/symfony/stimulus-bundle/assets/dist/loader.js'],
        '@hotwired/turbo' => ['version' => '8.0.23'],
    ];

`Stimulus`_ is a small JavaScript framework that connects JavaScript *controllers* to HTML elements via ``data-`` attributes. The ``assets/stimulus_bootstrap.js`` file starts the Stimulus application and automatically registers any controller stored in the ``assets/controllers/`` directory.

`Turbo`_ builds on this foundation to make navigation instant.

Navigating Instantly with Turbo
-------------------------------

.. index::
    single: Turbo;Drive

Turbo *Drive* has been silently at work all along: it intercepts every link click and form submission, fetches the page in the background, and swaps the ``<body>`` without a full page reload. The browser keeps the same JavaScript and CSS alive, so navigation feels immediate.

Open the browser developer tools, switch to the "Network" tab, and click through the website: page changes are ``fetch`` requests, not full document loads.

Turbo only asks one thing in return: proper HTTP semantics for forms. A successful submission must redirect (ours does, thanks to ``redirectToRoute()``), and a failed one must use a ``4xx`` status code. Symfony handles the latter automatically: when a submitted form is invalid, ``render()`` responds with a ``422 Unprocessable Entity`` status code.

Updating Part of a Page with Turbo Frames
-----------------------------------------

.. index::
    single: Turbo;Frame

Turbo Drive avoids full page reloads. Turbo *Frames* go one step further: they let a fragment of the page navigate independently from the rest of it.

The comments list is a perfect candidate. When browsing comment pages via the "Previous" and "Next" links, only the list should change; re-rendering the header, the form, and the footer is wasted work. Wrap the comments in a frame:

.. code-block:: diff
    :caption: patch_file

    --- i/templates/conference/show.html.twig
    +++ w/templates/conference/show.html.twig
    @@ -17,3 +17,4 @@
         <div class="row">
             <div class="col-12 col-lg-8">
    +            <turbo-frame id="comments" data-turbo-action="advance">
                 {% if comments|length > 0 %}
    @@ -56,5 +57,6 @@
                     No comments have been posted yet for this conference.
                 </div>
             {% endif %}
    +            </turbo-frame>
             </div>
             <div class="col-12 col-lg-4">

Links inside a ``<turbo-frame>`` element only update that frame: when clicking on "Next", Turbo fetches the page in the background and swaps the matching frame, leaving the rest of the page untouched.

The ``data-turbo-action="advance"`` attribute promotes the frame navigation to a full visit: the URL in the address bar is updated (including the ``offset`` query parameter), so paginated comments remain shareable and the browser back button works as expected.

Previewing the Comment Photo with Stimulus
------------------------------------------

.. index::
    single: Stimulus;Controller

Time to write our first lines of JavaScript of the whole book. Attendees submitting a photo cannot see it before posting the comment. Let's display a preview when they select a file.

Create a Stimulus controller (the file name determines the controller name, ``photo-preview``):

.. code-block:: javascript
    :caption: assets/controllers/photo_preview_controller.js

    import { Controller } from '@hotwired/stimulus';

    export default class extends Controller {
        show() {
            const [photo] = this.element.files;
            if (!photo) {
                this.preview?.remove();
                this.preview = null;

                return;
            }

            if (!this.preview) {
                this.preview = document.createElement('img');
                this.preview.className = 'img-thumbnail mt-2';
                this.preview.style.maxHeight = '150px';
                this.element.insertAdjacentElement('afterend', this.preview);
            }

            this.preview.src = URL.createObjectURL(photo);
        }
    }

That's all the JavaScript we need. Stimulus discovers and registers the controller automatically. Connect it to the photo field of the comment form via ``data-`` attributes:

.. code-block:: diff
    :caption: patch_file

    --- i/src/Form/CommentType.php
    +++ w/src/Form/CommentType.php
    @@ -26,6 +26,10 @@ class CommentType extends AbstractType
                 ->add('photo', FileType::class, [
                     'required' => false,
                     'mapped' => false,
    +                'attr' => [
    +                    'data-controller' => 'photo-preview',
    +                    'data-action' => 'change->photo-preview#show',
    +                ],
                     'constraints' => [
                         new Image(maxSize: '1024k')
                     ],

The ``data-controller`` attribute binds the controller to the file input, and ``data-action`` calls its ``show()`` method whenever the input value changes. Select a photo on a conference page and enjoy the preview.

Stimulus controllers work hand in hand with Turbo: because Drive and Frames update the page without reloading it, controllers are automatically connected and disconnected as elements enter and leave the DOM.

What about Mobile Applications?
-------------------------------

We got the SPA experience without building a second application: no separate JavaScript stack, no second web server, no CORS configuration, nothing new to deploy.

And if you ever need a *native* mobile application, the API created in the previous step is the right entry point: it is public, documented, and framework-agnostic. The website and the mobile application can evolve independently while sharing the same backend.

.. sidebar:: Going Further

    * The `Symfony UX initiative`_;

    * The `Turbo Handbook`_ and the `Stimulus Handbook`_;

    * The `Symfony UX Turbo docs`_, including Turbo *Streams*, which broadcast page updates to all connected users via Mercure;

    * `Live Components`_, to build dynamic interfaces with no custom JavaScript at all.

.. _`Stimulus`: https://stimulus.hotwired.dev/
.. _`Turbo`: https://turbo.hotwired.dev/
.. _`Symfony UX initiative`: https://ux.symfony.com/
.. _`Turbo Handbook`: https://turbo.hotwired.dev/handbook/introduction
.. _`Stimulus Handbook`: https://stimulus.hotwired.dev/handbook/introduction
.. _`Symfony UX Turbo docs`: https://symfony.com/bundles/ux-turbo/current/index.html
.. _`Live Components`: https://symfony.com/bundles/ux-live-component/current/index.html
